CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to Frequenz Microgrid API Python Bindings

## Build

You can use `build` to simply build the source and binary distribution:

```sh
python -m pip install build
python -m build
```

## Local development

You can use editable installs to develop the project locally (it will install
all the dependencies too):

```sh
python -m pip install -e .
```

Or you can install all development dependencies (`mypy`, `pylint`, `pytest`,
etc.) in one go too:
```sh
python -m pip install -e .[dev]
```

If you don't want to install all the dependencies, you can also use `nox` to
run the tests and other checks creating its own virtual environments:

```sh
python -m pip install .[dev-noxfile]
nox
```

You can also use `nox -R` to reuse the current testing environment to speed up
test at the expense of a higher chance to end up with a dirty test environment.

### Running tests / checks individually

For a better development test cycle you can install the runtime and test
dependencies and run `pytest` manually.

```sh
python -m pip install .[dev-pytest]  # included in .[dev] too

# And for example
pytest tests/test_*.py
```

Or you can use `nox`:

```sh
nox -R -s pytest -- test/test_*.py
```

The same appliest to `pylint` or `mypy` for example:

```sh
nox -R -s pylint -- test/test_*.py
nox -R -s mypy -- test/test_*.py
```

### Building the documentation

To build the documentation, first install the dependencies (if you didn't
install all `dev` dependencies):

```sh
python -m pip install -e .[dev-mkdocs]
```

Then you can build the documentation (it will be written in the `site/`
directory):

```sh
mkdocs build
```

Or you can just serve the documentation without building it using:

```sh
mkdocs serve
```

Your site will be updated **live** when you change your files (provided that
you used `pip install -e .`, beware of a common pitfall of using `pip install`
without `-e`, in that case the API reference won't change unless you do a new
`pip install`).

To build multi-version documentation, we use
[mike](https://github.com/jimporter/mike). If you want to see how the
multi-version sites looks like locally, you can use:

```sh
mike deploy my-version
mike set-default my-version
mike serve
```

`mike` works in mysterious ways. Some basic information:

* `mike deploy` will do a `mike build` and write the results to your **local**
  `gh-pages` branch. `my-version` is an arbitrary name for the local version
  you want to preview.
* `mike set-default` is needed so when you serve the documentation, it goes to
  your newly produced documentation by default.
* `mike serve` will serve the contents of your **local** `gh-pages` branch. Be
  aware that, unlike `mkdocs serve`, changes to the sources won't be shown
  live, as the `mike deploy` step is needed to refresh them.

Be careful not to use `--push` with `mike deploy`, otherwise it will push your
local `gh-pages` branch to the `origin` remote.

That said, if you want to test the actual website in **your fork**, you can
always use `mike deploy --push --remote your-fork-remote`, and then access the
GitHub pages produced for your fork.

## Releasing

These are the steps to create a new release:

1. Get the latest head you want to create a release from.

2. Update the `RELEASE_NOTES.md` file if it is not complete, up to date, and
   remove template comments (`<!-- ... ->`) and empty sections. Submit a pull
   request if an update is needed, wait until it is merged, and update the
   latest head you want to create a release from to get the new merged pull
   request.

3. Create a new signed tag using the release notes and
   a [semver](https://semver.org/) compatible version number with a `v` prefix,
   for example:

   ```sh
   git tag -s --cleanup=whitespace -F RELEASE_NOTES.md v0.0.1
   ```

4. Push the new tag.

5. A GitHub action will test the tag and if all goes well it will create
   a [GitHub
   Release](https://github.com/frequenz-floss/frequenz-microgrid-betterproto-python/releases),
   and upload a new package to
   [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/frequenz-microgrid-betterproto/)
   automatically.

6. Once this is done, reset the `RELEASE_NOTES.md` with the template:

   ```sh
   cp .github/RELEASE_NOTES.template.md RELEASE_NOTES.md
   ```

   Commit the new release notes and create a PR (this step should be automated
   eventually too).

7. Celebrate!

##  Cross-Arch Testing

This project has built-in support for testing across multiple architectures.
Currently, our CI conducts tests on `arm64` machines using QEMU emulation. We
also have the flexibility to expand this support to include additional
architectures in the future.

This project contains Dockerfiles that can be used in the CI to test the
python package in non-native machine architectures, e.g., `arm64`. The
Dockerfiles exist in the directory `.github/containers/nox-cross-arch`, and
follow a naming scheme so that they can be easily used in build matrices in the
CI, in `nox-cross-arch` job. The naming scheme is:

```
<arch>-<os>-python-<python-version>.Dockerfile
```

E.g.,

```
arm64-ubuntu-20.04-python-3.11.Dockerfile
```

If a Dockerfile for your desired target architecture, OS, and python version
does not exist here, please add one before proceeding to add your options to
the test matrix.

Commit message:

Update CONTRIBUTING.md to include how to update the API submodule
Signed-off-by: Leandro Lucarella <luca-frequenz@llucax.com>

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to Frequenz Microgrid API Python Bindings

## Build

You can use `build` to simply build the source and binary distribution:

```sh
python -m pip install build
python -m build
```

## Local development

You can use editable installs to develop the project locally (it will install
all the dependencies too):

```sh
python -m pip install -e .
```

Or you can install all development dependencies (`mypy`, `pylint`, `pytest`,
etc.) in one go too:
```sh
python -m pip install -e .[dev]
```

If you don't want to install all the dependencies, you can also use `nox` to
run the tests and other checks creating its own virtual environments:

```sh
python -m pip install .[dev-noxfile]
nox
```

You can also use `nox -R` to reuse the current testing environment to speed up
test at the expense of a higher chance to end up with a dirty test environment.

### Updating to a new version of the API

If you want to update the API bindings to a new version of the API, you can
update the `frequenz-api-microgrid` submodule and the `RELEASE_NOTES.md` file:

```sh
new_version="v0.0.1"  # for example
cd frequenz-api-microgrid
git fetch
git checkout "$new_version"
git submodule update --init --recursive
cd ..
vi RELEASE_NOTES.md  # Update the link to the API release
```

Then you can commit the changes:

```sh
git commit -a -s -m "Bump frequenz-api-microgrid to $new_version"
```

Then you can create a PR as usual.

### Running tests / checks individually

For a better development test cycle you can install the runtime and test
dependencies and run `pytest` manually.

```sh
python -m pip install .[dev-pytest]  # included in .[dev] too

# And for example
pytest tests/test_*.py
```

Or you can use `nox`:

```sh
nox -R -s pytest -- test/test_*.py
```

The same appliest to `pylint` or `mypy` for example:

```sh
nox -R -s pylint -- test/test_*.py
nox -R -s mypy -- test/test_*.py
```

### Building the documentation

To build the documentation, first install the dependencies (if you didn't
install all `dev` dependencies):

```sh
python -m pip install -e .[dev-mkdocs]
```

Then you can build the documentation (it will be written in the `site/`
directory):

```sh
mkdocs build
```

Or you can just serve the documentation without building it using:

```sh
mkdocs serve
```

Your site will be updated **live** when you change your files (provided that
you used `pip install -e .`, beware of a common pitfall of using `pip install`
without `-e`, in that case the API reference won't change unless you do a new
`pip install`).

To build multi-version documentation, we use
[mike](https://github.com/jimporter/mike). If you want to see how the
multi-version sites looks like locally, you can use:

```sh
mike deploy my-version
mike set-default my-version
mike serve
```

`mike` works in mysterious ways. Some basic information:

* `mike deploy` will do a `mike build` and write the results to your **local**
  `gh-pages` branch. `my-version` is an arbitrary name for the local version
  you want to preview.
* `mike set-default` is needed so when you serve the documentation, it goes to
  your newly produced documentation by default.
* `mike serve` will serve the contents of your **local** `gh-pages` branch. Be
  aware that, unlike `mkdocs serve`, changes to the sources won't be shown
  live, as the `mike deploy` step is needed to refresh them.

Be careful not to use `--push` with `mike deploy`, otherwise it will push your
local `gh-pages` branch to the `origin` remote.

That said, if you want to test the actual website in **your fork**, you can
always use `mike deploy --push --remote your-fork-remote`, and then access the
GitHub pages produced for your fork.

## Releasing

These are the steps to create a new release:

1. Get the latest head you want to create a release from.

2. Update the `RELEASE_NOTES.md` file if it is not complete, up to date, and
   remove template comments (`<!-- ... ->`) and empty sections. Submit a pull
   request if an update is needed, wait until it is merged, and update the
   latest head you want to create a release from to get the new merged pull
   request.

3. Create a new signed tag using the release notes and
   a [semver](https://semver.org/) compatible version number with a `v` prefix,
   for example:

   ```sh
   git tag -s --cleanup=whitespace -F RELEASE_NOTES.md v0.0.1
   ```

4. Push the new tag.

5. A GitHub action will test the tag and if all goes well it will create
   a [GitHub
   Release](https://github.com/frequenz-floss/frequenz-microgrid-betterproto-python/releases),
   and upload a new package to
   [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/frequenz-microgrid-betterproto/)
   automatically.

6. Once this is done, reset the `RELEASE_NOTES.md` with the template:

   ```sh
   cp .github/RELEASE_NOTES.template.md RELEASE_NOTES.md
   ```

   Commit the new release notes and create a PR (this step should be automated
   eventually too).

7. Celebrate!

##  Cross-Arch Testing

This project has built-in support for testing across multiple architectures.
Currently, our CI conducts tests on `arm64` machines using QEMU emulation. We
also have the flexibility to expand this support to include additional
architectures in the future.

This project contains Dockerfiles that can be used in the CI to test the
python package in non-native machine architectures, e.g., `arm64`. The
Dockerfiles exist in the directory `.github/containers/nox-cross-arch`, and
follow a naming scheme so that they can be easily used in build matrices in the
CI, in `nox-cross-arch` job. The naming scheme is:

```
<arch>-<os>-python-<python-version>.Dockerfile
```

E.g.,

```
arm64-ubuntu-20.04-python-3.11.Dockerfile
```

If a Dockerfile for your desired target architecture, OS, and python version
does not exist here, please add one before proceeding to add your options to
the test matrix.
